Autogen intervals issue5 (#10)
Sydney-Informatics-Hub/Somatic-shortV-nf: README.md

Reviewer: Have added suggestions for a couple of things that aren't very clear. Will create new issues to be addressed in your benchmarking work.

To run this pipeline you will need the following reference files:

- Indexed reference genome
- Common biallelic variant resources

**Reference genome indexes**  
You can download FASTA files from the [Ensembl](https://asia.ensembl.org/info/data/ftp/index.html), [UCSC](https://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/help/ftp.html), or [NCBI](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/doc/ftpfaq/) ftp. sites. Reference FASTA files must be accompanied by specific index files. You can use our [IndexReferenceFasta-nf pipeline](https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/IndexReferenceFasta-nf) to generate indexes. 
This pipeline uses the following tools for generating specific index files.
  - [samtools](https://www.htslib.org/doc/samtools-faidx.html).fai
  - [picard](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360037593331-CreateSequenceDictionary-Picard-).dict 
  - [bwa](https://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/bwa.shtml).amb, .ann, .bwt, .pac, .sa 

When you run the pipeline, you will use the mandatory `--ref` and `--dict` parameters to specify the location and names of the reference files:
```
--ref /path/to/ref.fasta --dict /path/to/ref.dict
```

**Common biallelic variant resources**  

> Common biallelic variant resources, such as databases that catalog known genetic variants (e.g., gnomAD) can be used to filter out germline variants and avoid false positives. 
> - A bash script `gatk4_selectvariants.pbs` is provided in the `scripts` folder which can read in your public resource VCF, and select common biallelic SNP variants (by default, those with an allele frequency of > 0.05). This script can be directly run on the NCI Gadi HPC. You can fill in the values for the required variables in this script and submit your job using the command :`qsub gatk4_selectvariants.pbs`.
> - We will include this functionality as an optional module in the next version of the pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Common biallelic variants databases (e.g. gnomAD) can be used to filter false positive germline variants from your somatic variant dataset. We have provided a script `scripts/gatk4_selectvariants.pbs` for this purpose. It executes[ GATK's SelectVariants](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/13832694334235-SelectVariants) tool. This will be included as an optional functionality in this pipeline in an upcoming update.  
```

Author: ok

When you run the pipeline, you will use the mandatory `--common_biallelic_variants` parameter to specify the location and name of the reference.fasta file:

> ```

Reviewer: Do you mean vcf?

Author: Yes I Meant vcf . Thanks

To run this pipeline you will need the following reference files:

- Indexed reference genome in FASTA format. 

> - Genomic-interval list files for Mutect2

Reviewer: Not sure why this point is included here if the pipeline creates intervals on the fly (whether it be automated or using a user-specified number of intervals). What input/ref materials need to be prepared for this? If it is only fasta and dict, then this point is irrelevant.

> - Panel of Normals (PoN) file for Mutect2

Reviewer: PoN doesnt really qualify as reference material as it is made for each cohort. I suggest including this in the inputs section instead.

- Common biallelic variant resources for GetPileupSummaries 

> You can download FASTA files from the [Ensembl](https://asia.ensembl.org/info/data/ftp/index.html), [UCSC](https://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/help/ftp.html), or [NCBI](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/doc/ftpfaq/) ftp. sites. Reference FASTA files must be accompanied by specific index files. You can use our [IndexReferenceFasta-nf pipeline](https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/IndexReferenceFasta-nf) to generate indexes. 

Reviewer: Changes here are required for resolving https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/Somatic-shortV-nf/issues/7. Please ensure you work on this section in a new PR once this PR is resolved. Ignoring for now.

This pipeline uses the following tools for generating specific index files.
  - [samtools](https://www.htslib.org/doc/samtools-faidx.html).fai
  - [picard](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360037593331-CreateSequenceDictionary-Picard-).dict 
  - [bwa](https://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/bwa.shtml).amb, .ann, .bwt, .pac, .sa 

When you run the pipeline, you will use the mandatory --ref parameter to specify the location and name of the reference.fasta file:
```
--ref /path/to/ref.fasta

> ```

Reviewer: Tidy formatting, add a header for consistency with other sections below 
```suggestion
**Reference genome indexes**

When you run the pipeline, you will use the mandatory `--ref` parameter to specify the location and name of the reference.fasta file:
\```
--ref /path/to/ref.fasta
\```
```

> **Create genomic-interval list files using the pipeline**  

Reviewer: Tidy formatting: 

```suggestion
**Create genomic-interval list files using the pipeline**  
  
```

Interval lists define subsets of genomic regions in the genome. It is advisable to split the genome into genomic-intervals to parallelize execution and/or exclude regions that have bad or uninformative data. Please refer to this [link](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360035531852-Intervals-and-interval-lists) for more details. 

Documented below are the two different methods by which you can generate the interval files for Mutect2 when you run the pipeline using the nextflow command.  

***Generate optimised number of intervals based on your genome size***  
When you run the pipeline, you will use the mandatory --ref  and --dict parameters to specify the location and name of the reference files. The genomic-interval files will be generated by the pipeline based on these two parameters.
```
--ref /path/to/ref.fasta --dict /path/to/ref.dict

> ```

Reviewer: If this doesnt require a user to prepare any input files then it doesn't need to be included in this section.

***Generate a specific number of intervals (Optional)***   

> You can define a specific number genomic-intervals based on the number of cpus available to parallelize execution. When you run the pipeline, you will use the optional `--number_of_intervals` parameter as an integer value. The genomic-interval files will be generated by the pipeline based on this parameter.

Reviewer: Same as above, this section is about preparing input and ref files, not demonstrating how to execute the pipeline

#### Create a Panel of Normals (PoN) for Mutect2  

> The user can create a a panel of normals (PoN) containing germline and artifactual sites for use with Mutect2 using the instructions provided [here](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360037058172-CreateSomaticPanelOfNormals-BETA-). We will include this functionality as an optional module in the next version of the pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will need to provide a [panel of normals (PoN)](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360037058172-CreateSomaticPanelOfNormals-BETA-) containing germline and artifactual sites for use with Mutect2. This functionality is currently under development and will be included in this pipeline shortly.  
```

Reviewer: Ensure the version of GATK documentation you're linking to corresponds with the version of GATK being run by your pipeline

Author: Changed the link to gatk4.4

#### Create common biallelic variant resources for GetPileupSummaries 
- A bash script `gatk4_selectvariants.pbs` is provided in the `scripts` folder which can read in your public resource VCF, and select common biallelic SNP variants (by default, those with an allele frequency of > 0.05).
- This script can be directly run on the NCI Gadi HPC but it can also be modified to run on any other computational resource.
- In the `gatk4_selectvariants.pbs` script, you can replace `<>` with your resource for resource=`<path/to/public_dataset.vcf.gz>` and output file resource_common=`</path/to/output_public_dataset_common_biallelic.vcf.gz>`. 
- On NCI Gadi HPC you can adjust the compute resouces and submit your job using the command :`qsub gatk4_selectvariants.pbs`.

> - We will include this functionality as an optional module in the next version of the pipeline.

Reviewer: Why is this in dot points when other sections aren't? Please be more consistent with your formatting and try format things in a way that is easy to read for your user.

  - [bwa](https://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/bwa.shtml).amb, .ann, .bwt, .pac, .sa 

***Note***:  

> You must specify the full path for the reference fasta, even if it is in your working directory.

Reviewer: Not really sure what this is referring to. You explain how to provide reference file with `--ref` in step 4 so this can probably be removed here.

### 3. Required files

#### **Create genomic-interval list files required for Mutect2**
Interval lists define subsets of genomic regions in the genome. It is advisable to split the genome into genomic-intervals to parallelize execution and/or exclude regions that have bad or uninformative data. Please refer to this [link](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360035531852-Intervals-and-interval-lists) for more details. 

Documented below are the two different methods by which you can generate the interval files for Mutect2 when you run the pipeline using the nextflow command.  

> **(a) Generate optimised number of intervals based on your genome size**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Generate optimised number of intervals based on your genome size**
```

  - Provide the [picard](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360037593331-CreateSequenceDictionary-Picard-).dict file in addition to the Reference FASTA file in the command.

>   - Please **do not** provide the `--number_of_intervals` value in the command.

Reviewer: Given this section is about preparing input data you don't want to confuse people by providing unnecessary details at this stage. Please remove this line or at least move to the relevant section of instructions for running the pipeline.

  - This generates minimum 100 Mb sized intervals e.g.  32 genomic-interval files for the Human genome hg38.

> **(b) Generate a specific number of intervals**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Generate a specific number of intervals**  
```

Alternatively, based on the computing resources available on the your operating system, you might want to generate a specific number of genomic-intervals.
  - Please provide an integer value `--number_of_intervals` in the command. 

>   - You do not need to provide the [picard](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360037593331-CreateSequenceDictionary-Picard-).dict file for this option.

Reviewer: Instead of saying what users don't need to do, say what they do need to do.

#### Create a Panel of Normals (PoN) for Mutect2  

> The user can create a PoN file using our [pipeline](https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/Somatic-ShortV?tab=readme-ov-file#4-create-pon-per-genomic-interval).

Reviewer: Given this is current not properly documented just yet, suggest we remove this section and instead point to documentation from GATK about how to make PoN instead.

#### Create common biallelic variant resources for GetPileupSummaries 

> The user can create the Common biallelic variant resource files using our [pipeline](https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/Somatic-ShortV?tab=readme-ov-file#0-optional-create-common-biallelic-variant-resources)

Reviewer: Why hasn't this feature been built into this pipeline if it is a direct porting of SomaticShortV? 

Please create an issue describing this feature to be added and we can address it later, remove this recommendation from the README as the intention behind Nextflowing the pipeline was to reduce the workflow execution steps down to 1. 

If what you've linked here works as a standalone script, please add a copy of it to this repository in the `Scripts` directory and link to that here, mentioining this functionality will be included in the workflow.

Author: - I have now added the script [gatk4_selectvariants.pbs](https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/Somatic-ShortV/blob/master/gatk4_selectvariants.pbs) which takes your public resource VCF, and selects common biallelic SNP variants (by default, those with an allele frequency of > 0.05) to **Scripts** folder

- The README.md has been changed accordingly 

- This will be added as a optional module in version 2 of the nextflow pipeline

### 4. Run the pipeline 

> The most basic run command for this pipeline with all required paramters looks like this: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The minimal run command for this executing this pipeline is: 
```

```
nextflow run main.nf --input samples.csv \
                     --ref /path/to/ref.fasta --dict /path/to/ref.dict \
                     --ponvcf /path/to/pon \
                     --common_biallelic_variants /path/to/common_biallelic_variants
```

By default, this will generate `work` directory, `results` output directory and a `runInfo` run metrics directory inside the results directory. 

> This pipeline has been tested for NCI Gadi HPC and the paramaters `--whoami` and `--gadi_account` will have to be included as discussed in the section [Infrastructure usage and recommendations](#infrastructure-usage-and-recommendations) .

Reviewer: ```suggestion

**Running on NCI Gadi HPC**

This pipeline has been optimised for NCI Gadi HPC, instructions for executing on Gadi are provided in [Infrastructure usage and recommendations](#infrastructure-usage-and-recommendations) .
```

```
nextflow run main.nf --input samples.csv \
                     --ref /path/to/ref.fasta --dict /path/to/ref.dict \
                     --ponvcf /path/to/pon \
                     --common_biallelic_variants /path/to/common_biallelic_variants \
                     -profile gadi \
                     --whoami $(whoami) --gadi_account $PROJECT    

> ```

Reviewer: Suggest moving this to [Infrastructure usage and recommendations](#infrastructure-usage-and-recommendations) to reduce repetition

To specify additional optional tool-specific parameters, see what flags are supported by running:

```
nextflow run main.nf --help 
```

A more advanced nextflow command with optional parameters, where you can define the name of the output folder and provide an integer value for the number of genomic-interval files to be generated looks like this:
```
nextflow run main.nf --input samples.csv \
                     --ref /path/to/ref.fasta --dict /path/to/ref.dict \
                     --ponvcf /path/to/pon \
                     --common_biallelic_variants /path/to/common_biallelic_variants \
                     -profile gadi \
                     --whoami $(whoami) --gadi_account $PROJECT \
                     --outDir name_output_folder \
                     --number_of_intervals INT
```

> 

Reviewer: This doesnt adequately explain the use of parameters. This section should explain all parameters and when you might need to use them.

If for any reason your workflow fails, you are able to resume the workflow from the last successful process with `-resume`. 

> ### NCI Gadi HPC

Reviewer: Currently you have information required to execute workflow on Gadi split across various parts of the README. You need to commit to one part of the README that will contain all of this information. See comment above re: infrastructure usage recommendations section.

The most basic run command for this pipeline is: 

```

> nextflow run main.nf --input samples.csv --ref reference.fasta --ponvcf pon.vcf.gz

Reviewer: This is not accurate. If I run this I get the help message and no error but the workflow doesn't run: 

```bash
NOTE: Nextflow is not tested with Java 1.8.0_392 -- It's recommended the use of version 11 up to 18

N E X T F L O W  ~  version 22.04.3
Launching `main.nf` [deadly_heyrovsky] DSL2 - revision: 28fee1ea87

===================================================================
===================================================================
SOMATIC SHORT V - NF 
===================================================================
===================================================================

Created by the Sydney Informatics Hub, University of Sydney

Documentation   @ https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/Somatic-shortV-nf

Cite                                    @ https://doi.org/10.48546/workflowhub.workflow.691.1

Log issues    @ https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/Somatic-shortV-nf/issues

All the default parameters are set in `nextflow.config`

=======================================================================================
Workflow run parameters 
=======================================================================================
version           : 1.0
input             : /scratch/er01/ndes8648/pipeline_work/nextflow/INFRA-83-Somatic-ShortV/test_files_for_Georgie/samples.csv
reference         : /g/data/er01/SIH-HPC-WGS/Reference/hs38DH.fasta
small_exac_common : 
ponvcf            : /scratch/er01/ndes8648/pipeline_work/nextflow/INFRA-83-Somatic-ShortV/test_files_for_Georgie/pon.vcf.gz
intervalList_path : 
outDir            : results
workDir           : /scratch/er01/gs5517/workflowTesting/Somatic-shortV-nf/work

=======================================================================================

 

Usage:   nextflow run main.nf --input samples.csv --ref reference.fasta --ponvcf pon.vcf.gz

Required Arguments:
  --input                                     Full path and name of sample input file (csv format)
 --ref                                        Full path and name of reference genome (fasta format)
  --ponvcf                        Full path and name of the Panel of Normals (ponvcf) file

Optional Arguments:
  --outDir                        Specify name of results directory. 
  --dict                          Full path and name of reference genome dictionary file (contains metadata and sequence dictionary information)
                                  The above dict file is required when the user chooses to create optimised number of intervals based on genome size

HPC accounting arguments:
  --whoami                    HPC user name (Setonix or Gadi HPC)
  --gadi_account              Project accounting code for NCI Gadi (e.g. aa00)
  ```

Author: I have tried to identify the mandatory parameters and a couple of optional ones.

I have a question which I am unable to get my head around. Can you suggest what could be the problem?

In the run_pipeline_on_gadi_script.sh script , if
-  I remove any of the mandatory parameters from the command , e.g. **--ref ${ref}** from the command below , the if condition in main.nf catches it and displays the help dialog and prevents execution of the pipeline.

nextflow run main.nf \
        --input ${samples} \
        -profile gadi \
        --whoami $(whoami) --gadi_account $PROJECT \
         --dict ${dict} \
	--common_biallelic_variants ${common_biallelic_variants} \
        --ponvcf ${ponvcf} \
        --outDir ${outDir} \
        --number_of_intervals ${number_of_intervals}

However if 
- I inactivate (using #) the parameter
ref=/g/data/er01/SIH-HPC-WGS/Reference/hs38DH.fasta
 but retain  it in the command as below
nextflow run main.nf \
        --input ${samples} \
        -profile gadi \
        --whoami $(whoami) --gadi_account $PROJECT \
        **--ref ${ref}** --dict ${dict} \
	--common_biallelic_variants ${common_biallelic_variants} \
        --ponvcf ${ponvcf} \
        --outDir ${outDir} \
        --number_of_intervals ${number_of_intervals}
        
The value displayed for ref = true and I get an error!

I am concerned that the user can do one of the above (by mistake) and both the options should lead to identical help display message!

Thanks.

Reviewer: Bit confused by this, why would anyone hash the `ref=` variable in the bash script if it is a required argument and your instructions document that?   

You've used an if statement to ensure the pipeline doesn't run unless all those required params are provided: https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/Somatic-shortV-nf/blob/0e9f22d1b3bc1b4ff7b43aa1fc5db78afba41ed9/main.nf#L83

The `ref` parameter is defined as false in `nextflow.config`: https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/Somatic-shortV-nf/blob/0e9f22d1b3bc1b4ff7b43aa1fc5db78afba41ed9/nextflow.config#L18

But you're still passing an (albeit empty) value via your run command when using `--ref ${ref}`. To nextflow it might look like `--ref <space>` so that might be why its displaying as `true`.

Author: > Bit confused by this, why would anyone hash the `ref=` variable in the bash script if it is a required argument and your instructions document that?

**By mistake I guess**; So I was thinking of stopping the user .. But I agree. `ref=` variable is a mandatory requirement.

> You've used an if statement to ensure the pipeline doesn't run unless all those required params are provided:
> 
> https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/Somatic-shortV-nf/blob/0e9f22d1b3bc1b4ff7b43aa1fc5db78afba41ed9/main.nf#L83

BTW The above if condition is not a part of the updated branch main.nf at https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/Somatic-shortV-nf/blob/autogen_intervals_issue5/main.nf
This is how it looks like now: 
```
  if ( params.help == true || params.ref == false || params.input == false || params.ponvcf == false || params.common_biallelic_variants == false || params.dict == false)
```

> 
> The `ref` parameter is defined as false in `nextflow.config`:
> 
> https://github.com/Sydney-Informatics-Hub/Somatic-shortV-nf/blob/0e9f22d1b3bc1b4ff7b43aa1fc5db78afba41ed9/nextflow.config#L18
> 
> But you're still passing an (albeit empty) value via your run command when using `--ref ${ref}`. To nextflow it might look like `--ref <space>` so that might be why its displaying as `true`.
**OK Thanks.**

Reviewer: What do you mean stopping the user? How would you do this?

        
```

> **Note**: Please use the command provided in the script `scripts/run_pipeline_on_gadi_script.sh` on NCI Gadi HPC.

Reviewer: You need to explain why and how to apply each parameter including what is required and what is optional. This pipeline is also written for Gadi only at this stage and you're missing any explanation of how to engage the job scheduler (i.e. use gadi account and whoami

Author: Changed

I have now added 
- A basic command
- The basic command to be run specifically on NCI Gadi (with reference to the job schedular paramters)
- An advanced command with a couple of optional parameters

```
nextflow run main.nf --help 
```
A more advanced nextflow command with optional parameters, where you can define the name of the output folder and provide an integer value for the number of genomic-interval files to be generated looks like this:
```
nextflow run main.nf --input samples.csv \
                     --ref /path/to/ref.fasta --dict /path/to/ref.dict \
                     --ponvcf /path/to/pon \
                     --common_biallelic_variants /path/to/common_biallelic_variants \
                     --outDir name_output_folder \
                     --number_of_intervals INT

> ```

Reviewer: Remove this. I don't think we should be saying this is more advanced, your dot points below explain what each of the mandatory and optional parameters do.

**Mandatory parameters**  
* `--input`		                      Full path and name of sample input file (csv format)  
* `--dict`                          Full path and name of reference genome dictionary file (dict format)  (**Step:** create genomic-intervals)  
* `--ref`			                      Full path and name of reference genome (fasta format)                 (**Step:** Mutect2)  
* `--ponvcf`                        Full path and name of the Panel of Normals file (vcf format)          (**Step:** Mutect2)  
* `--common_biallelic_variants`     Full path and name of the common biallelic variant resources file (vcf format)(**Step:** GetPileupSummaries)  

**Optional parameters**  
* `--outDir`                        Name of the results directory                                         (**default:** `results`)  

> * `--number_of_intervals`           Define a specific number genomic-intervals for parallelisation        (**default:** `number of intervals are calculated using genome size`)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `--number_of_intervals`           Define a specific number genomic-intervals for parallelisation        (**default:** automatically calculated using genome size)  
```

Author: ok

> If for any reason your workflow fails, you are able to resume the workflow from the last successful process with `-resume`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If for any reason your workflow fails, you are able to resume the workflow from the last successful process with `[-resume](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/getstarted.html#modify-and-resume)`. 
```

This pipeline has been optimised for NCI Gadi HPC, instructions for executing on Gadi are provided in [Infrastructure usage and recommendations](#infrastructure-usage-and-recommendations)

### 5. Results 

> Once the pipeline is complete, you will find all outputs for each sample in the `results` directory. 

Reviewer: Going to create a separate issue for this so it can be addressed in a new pull request, we need to explain what the outputs are and how they are organised.

module load nextflow singularity
```

To run this workflow on NCI Gadi HPC, you can excecute the script `scripts/run_pipeline_on_gadi_script.sh` by first entering the following details in the PBS header of the script:
- project code

> - Resource-related details  

Reviewer: Also going to create another issue for this to be addressed in the benchmarking PR. The mem and ncpu resources consumed by the head nextflow job submitted using your pbs script will be standard for all runs and we should just provide them.

```
qsub runPipeline_script.sh
```

### 5. Results 
Once the pipeline is complete, you will find all outputs for each sample in the `results` directory. 

> ## Infrastructure usage and recommendations

Reviewer: See comments above about clearly capturing execution information for Gadi in one place
